21 July 2011
d
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2**
Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP)
e
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
d
e
Draft agreed by the Efficacy Working Party September 2009
Adoption by CHMP for release for consultation 19 November 2009
s
End of consultation (deadline for comments) 31 May 2010
Agreed by Pharmacokinetics Working Party (PKWP) June 2011
r
Adoption by CHMP 21 July 2011
e
Date for coming into effect 1 February 2012
*The corrections concerpn: Section 4.1.5. ‘Accuracy’ (p. 7), paragraph Within-run accuracy: concentration level of
MQC; Section 6 ‘Incurred samples reanalysis’ (p. 13), paragraph 2: inclusion of the equation; Section 7.1.1.11.
‘Stability of the samples’ (p. 16), paragraph 1: deletion of the last sentence ‘A bracketing approach may be
considered.’; typographical correction in the title of Section 7.3.2 ‘Acceptance criteria for study sample analysis’ (p.
u
17).
*The corrections concern: Section 4.1 ‘reference standards’ (p. 5), paragraph 2 and 3: eliminated reference to
certified standards.
S
Keywords CHMP, EMEA, Guideline, validation, bioanalytical method, analyses
This guideline is superseded by the ICH guideline M10 on bioanalytical method validation and
study sample analysis, following its finalisation in July 2022
30 Churchill Place ● Canary Wharf ● London E14 5EU ● United Kingdom
Telephone +44 (0)20 3660 6000 Facsimile +44 (0)20 3660 5555
Send a question via our website www.ema.europa.eu/contact An agency of the European Union
© European Medicines Agency, 2015. Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
Table of contents
d
1. Introduction (background) ...................................................................... 3
2. Scope....................................................................................................... 3
e
3. Legal basis .............................................................................................. 3
4. Method validation .................................................................................... 4
4.1. Full validation of an analytical method ...............d.....................................................4
4.1.1. Selectivity .................................................................................................. 5
4.1.2. Carry-over .................................................................................................. 6
4.1.3. Lower limit of quantification..........e................................................................6
4.1.4. Calibration curve ......................................................................................... 6
4.1.5. Accuracy .................................................................................................... 7
4.1.6. Precision ..........................s..........................................................................8
4.1.7. Dilution integrity ......................................................................................... 8
4.1.8. Matrix effect ............................................................................................... 8
4.1.9. Stability....................r.................................................................................9
4.2. Partial validation ................................................................................................ 10
4.3. Cross validation ........e......................................................................................... 10
5. Analysis of study samples ..................................................................... 11
5.1. Analytical run..................................................................................................... 11
p
5.2. Acceptance criteria of an analytical run.................................................................11
5.3. Calibration range ................................................................................................ 12
5.4. Reanalysis of study samples ................................................................................ 12
u
5.5. Integration........................................................................................................13
6. Incurred samples reanalysis .................................................................. 13
7S. Ligand binding assays ...........................................................................14
7.1.1. Full validation ........................................................................................... 15
7.2. Partial validation and cross-validation ................................................................... 18
7.3. Analysis of study samples .................................................................................... 18
7.3.1. Analytical run............................................................................................18
7.3.2. Acceptance criteria for study sample analysis ................................................ 18
7.3.3. Incurred samples reanalysis ....................................................................... 18
8. Reports .................................................................................................. 18
8.1. Validation report ................................................................................................ 18
8.2. Analytical report ................................................................................................. 19
Definitions ................................................................................................. 21
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 2/23

Executive summary
This guideline defines key elements necessary for the validation of bioanalytical methods. The
guideline focuses on the validation of the bioanalytical methods generating quantitative concentration
data used for pharmacokinetic and toxicokinetic parameter determinations. Guidance and criteria are
given on the application of these validated methods in the routine analysis of study samples from
animal and human studies.
d
1. Introduction (background)
e
Measurement of drug concentrations in biological matrices (such as serum, plasma, blood, urine, and
saliva) is an important aspect of medicinal product development. Such data may be required to
support applications for new actives substances and generics as well as variations to authorised drug
products. The results of animal toxicokinetic studies and of dclinical trials, including bioequivalence
studies are used to make critical decisions supporting the safety and efficacy of a medicinal drug
substance or product. It is therefore paramount that the applied bioanalytical methods used are well
characterised, fully validated and documented to a esatisfactory standard in order to yield reliable
results.
Acceptance criteria wider than those defined in this guideline may be used in special situations. This
should be prospectively defined based on thse intended use of the method.
2. Scope
r
This guideline provides recommendations for the validation of bioanalytical methods applied to
e
measure drug concentrations in biological matrices obtained in animal toxicokinetic studies and all
phases of clinical trials. As ligand binding assays differ substantially from chromatographic analytical
methods, separate validation recommendations for ligand binding assays are provided.
p
In addition, specific aspects for the analysis of study samples will be addressed.
Furthermore, this guideline will describe when partial validation or cross validation should be carried
out in addition to the full validation of an analytical method.
u
Methods used for determining quantitative concentrations of biomarkers used in assessing
pharmacodynamic endpoints are out of the scope of this guideline.
S
3. Legal basis
This guideline has to be read in conjunction with the introduction and general principles (4) and Part I
and II of the Annex I to Directive 2001/83 as amended. It applies to Marketing Authorisation
Applications for human medicinal products submitted in accordance with the Directive 2001/83/EC as
amended, and Regulation (EC) No. 726/2004, in which the analysis of drug concentrations in a
biological matrix is part of the application.
The validation of bioanalytical methods and the analysis of study samples for clinical trials in humans
should be performed following the principles of Good Clinical Practice (GCP). Further guidance that will
help clinical laboratories develop and maintain quality systems which will comply with relevant
European Union Directives, national regulations and associated guidance documents can be found in
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 3/23

the “Reflection Paper for Laboratories That Perform The Analysis Or Evaluation Of Clinical Trial
Samples.” (EMA/INS/GCP/532137/2010).
Non-clinical (pharmaco-toxicological) studies submitted in a marketing authorisation application shall
be carried out in conformity with the provisions related to Good Laboratory Practice, Directive
2004/10/EC on the harmonisation of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the
application of the principles of good laboratory practice and the verification of their applications for
d
tests on chemical substances and Directive 2004/9/EC on the inspection and verification of good
laboratory practice (GLP). Normally, the validation of bioanalytical methods used in non-clinical
pharmacotoxicological studies that are carried out in conformity with the provisions related to Good
Laboratory Practice should be performed following the Principles of Geood Laboratory Practice. Aspects
of method validation not performed according to GLP should be clearly identified and their potential
impact on the validation status of the method indicated. Methods used in pre-clinical studies not
required to be performed to GLP should be fit for purpose but not necessarily developed in a GLP
d
facility.
4. Method validation
e
4.1. Full validation of an analytical method
s
A full method validation should be performed for any analytical method whether new or based upon
literature.
The main objective of method validatiron is to demonstrate the reliability of a particular method for the
determination of an analyte concentration in a specific biological matrix, such as blood, serum, plasma,
urine, or saliva. Moreover, if aen anticoagulant is used, validation should be performed using the same
anticoagulant as for the study samples. Generally a full validation should be performed for each
species and matrix concerned.
In some cases, it mapy be problematic for validation purposes to obtain an identical matrix compared to
the matrix of the study samples. A suitable alternative matrix may be used, e.g. synthetically prepared
cerebrospinal fluid, if justified.
The main chuaracteristics of a bioanalytical method that are essential to ensure the acceptability of the
performance and the reliability of analytical results are: selectivity, lower limit of quantification, the
response function and calibration range (calibration curve performance), accuracy, precision, matrix
effects, stability of the analyte(s) in the biological matrix and stability of the analyte(s) and of the
S
internal standard in the stock and working solutions and in extracts under the entire period of storage
and processing conditions.
Usually one analyte or drug has to be determined, but on occasions it may be appropriate to measure
more than one analyte. This may involve two different drugs, but can also involve a parent drug with
its metabolites, or the enantiomers or isomers of a drug. In these cases the principles of validation and
analysis apply to all analytes of interest.
Reference standards
During method validation and analysis of study samples, a blank biological matrix will be spiked with
the analyte(s) of interest using solutions of reference standard(s) to prepare calibration standards,
quality control samples and stability samples. In addition, suitable internal standard(s) (IS) can be
added during sample processing in chromatographic methods.
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 4/23

It is important that the quality of the reference standard and IS is ensured, as the quality (purity) may
affect the outcome of the analysis, and therefore the outcome of the study data. Therefore the
reference standards used during the validation and study sample analysis should be obtained from an
authentic and traceable source.
Suitable reference standards include compendial standards, commercially available standards, or
sufficiently characterised standards prepared in-house or by an external non-commercial organisation.
d
A certificate of analysis is required to ensure purity and provide information on storage conditions,
expiration date and batch number of the reference standard.
The use of such standards is not needed for IS, as long as the suitability for use is demonstrated, e.g.
e
lack of analytical interference is shown for the substance itself or any impurities thereof. A certificate of
analysis is not required.
When mass-spectrometry (MS) detection is used in the bioanalytical method, a stable isotope-labelled
d
IS is recommended to be used whenever possible. However, it is essential that the labelled standard is
of the highest isotope purity and that no isotope exchange reaction occurs. The presence of any
unlabelled analyte should be checked and if relative amounts of unlabelled analyte are detected the
potential influence has to be evaluated during metheod validation.
4.1.1. Selectivity
s
The analytical method should be able to differentiate the analyte(s) of interest and IS from
endogenous components in the matrix or other components in the sample. Selectivity should be
proved using at least 6 individual sourrces of the appropriate blank matrix, which are individually
analysed and evaluated for interference. Use of fewer sources is acceptable in case of rare matrices.
Normally, absence of interferieng components is accepted where the response is less than 20% of the
lower limit of quantification for the analyte and 5% for the internal standard.
It may also be necessary to investigate the extent of any interference caused by metabolites of the
drug(s), interferencep from degradation products formed during sample preparation, and interference
from possible co-administered medications. Co-medications normally used in the subject population
studied which may potentially interfere should be taken into account at the stage of method validation,
or on a study specific and compound specific base.
u
The possibility of back-conversion of a metabolite into parent analyte during the successive steps of
the analysis (including extraction procedures or in the MS source) should also be evaluated, when
relevant (i.e. potentially unstable metabolites e.g. acidic metabolites to ester, unstable N-oxides or
S
glucuronide metabolites, lactone-ring structures). The extent of back-conversion should be established
and the impact on the study results discussed. It is acknowledged that this evaluation will not be
possible early during drug development of a new chemical entity when the metabolism is not yet
evaluated. However, it is expected that this issue is taken into account and a partial validation is
performed if relevant as further knowledge regarding metabolism of the active substance is gained
during drug development.
It is recognized that in some cases it is very difficult to obtain the metabolites of interest. Alternatively,
back-conversion of a metabolite can be checked by applying incurred sample reanalysis. However, in
this case potential back conversion during sample processing cannot be ruled out.
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 5/23

4.1.2. Carry-over
Carry-over should be addressed and minimised during method development. During validation carry-
over should be assessed by injecting blank samples after a high concentration sample or calibration
standard at the upper limit of quantification. Carry over in the blank sample following the high
concentration standard should not be greater than 20% of the lower limit of quantification (LLOQ; see
below) and 5% for the internal standard. If it appears that carry-over is unavoidable, study samples
d
should not be randomised. Specific measures should be considered, tested during the validation and
applied during the analysis of the study samples, so that it does not affect accuracy and precision. This
could include the injection of blank samples after samples with an expected high concentration, before
e
the analysis of the next study sample.
4.1.3. Lower limit of quantification
d
The lower limit of quantification (LLOQ) is the lowest concentration of analyte in a sample which can be
quantified reliably, with an acceptable accuracy and precision. The LLOQ is considered being the lowest
calibration standard (see Accuracy and Precision). In addition, the analyte signal of the LLOQ sample
e
should be at least 5 times the signal of a blank sample. The LLOQ should be adapted to expected
concentrations and to the aim of the study. As an example, for bioequivalence studies the LLOQ should
be not higher than 5% of the C , while such a low LLOQ may be not necessary for exploratory
max
s
pharmacokinetic studies.
4.1.4. Calibration curve
r
The response of the instrument with regard to the concentration of analyte should be known, and
e
should be evaluated over a specified concentration range. The calibration standards should be
prepared in the same matrix as the matrix of the intended study samples by spiking the blank matrix
with known concentrations of the analyte. There should be one calibration curve for each analyte
studied in the methopd validation and for each analytical run.
Ideally, before carrying out the validation of the analytical method it should be known what
concentration range is expected. This range should be covered by the calibration curve range, defined
u
by the LLOQ being the lowest calibration standard and the upper limit of quantification (ULOQ), being
the highest calibration standard. The range should be established to allow adequate description of the
pharmacokinetics of the analyte of interest.
S
A minimum of six calibration concentration levels should be used, in addition to the blank sample
(processed matrix sample without analyte and without IS) and a zero sample (processed matrix with
IS). Each calibration standard can be analysed in replicate.
A relationship which can simply and adequately describe the response of the instrument with regard to
the concentration of analyte should be applied. The blank and zero samples should not be taken into
consideration to calculate the calibration curve parameters.
The calibration curve parameters should be reported (slope and intercept in case of linear fit). In
addition, the back calculated concentrations of the calibration standards should be presented together
with the calculated mean accuracy values (see definition of Accuracy below). All the available (or
acceptable) curves obtained during validation, with a minimum of 3 should be reported.
The back calculated concentrations of the calibration standards should be within ±15% of the nominal
value, except for the LLOQ for which it should be within ±20%. At least 75% of the calibration
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 6/23

standards, with a minimum of six calibration standard levels, must fulfil this criterion. In case
replicates are used, the criteria (within ±15% or ±20% for LLOQ) should also be fulfilled for at least
50% of the calibration standards tested per concentration level. In case a calibration standard does not
comply with these criteria, this calibration standard sample should be rejected, and the calibration
curve without this calibration standard should be re-evaluated, including regression analysis. In case
all replicates of the LLOQ or the ULOQ calibration standard are rejected then the batch should be
rejected from the validation, the possible source of the failure be determinedd and the method revised
(if necessary). If the next validation batch also fails, then the method should be revised before
restarting validation.
Although the calibration curve should preferably be prepared using fereshly spiked samples, it is allowed
to use previously prepared and stored calibration samples, if supported by appropriate stability data.
4.1.5. Accuracy d
The accuracy of an analytical method describes the closeness of the determined value obtained by the
method to the nominal concentration of the analyte (expressed in percentage). Accuracy should be
e
assessed on samples spiked with known amounts of the analyte, the quality control samples (QC
samples). The QC samples should be spiked independently from the calibration standards, using
separately prepared stock solutions, unless the nominal concentration(s) of the stock solutions have
been established. s
The QC samples are analysed against the calibration curve, and the obtained concentrations are
compared with the nominal value. The accuracy should be reported as percent of the nominal value.
r
Accuracy should be evaluated for the values of the QC samples obtained within a single run (the within
run accuracy) and in different runs (the between-run accuracy).
e
To enable evaluation of any trends over time within one run, it is recommended to demonstrate
accuracy and precision of QC samples over at least one of the runs in a size equivalent to a prospective
analytical run of study samples.
p
Within-run accuracy
Within-run accuracy should be determined by analysing in a single run a minimum of 5 samples per
u
level at a minimum of 4 concentration levels which are covering the calibration curve range: the LLOQ,
within three times the LLOQ (low QC), around 30 - 50% of the calibration curve range (medium QC),
and at least at 75% of the upper calibration curve range (high QC). The mean concentration should be
wSithin 15% of the nominal values for the QC samples, except for the LLOQ which should be within 20%
of the nominal value.
Between –run accuracy
For the validation of the between-run accuracy, LLOQ, low, medium and high QC samples from at least
three runs analysed on at least two different days should be evaluated. The mean concentration should
be within 15% of the nominal values for the QC samples, except for the LLOQ which should be within
20% of the nominal value.
Reported method validation data and the determination of accuracy and precision should include all
results obtained except those cases where errors are obvious and documented.
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 7/23

4.1.6. Precision
The precision of the analytical method describes the closeness of repeated individual measures of
analyte. Precision is expressed as the coefficient of variation (CV). Precision should be demonstrated
for the LLOQ, low, medium and high QC samples, within a single run and between different runs, i.e.
using the same runs and data as for the demonstration of accuracy.
Within-run precision d
For the validation of the within-run precision, there should be a minimum of five samples per
concentration level at LLOQ, low, medium and high QC samples in a single run. The within-run CV
value should not exceed 15% for the QC samples, except for the LLOeQ which should not exceed 20%.
Between –run precision
For the validation of the between-run precision, LLOQ, low, medium and high QC samples from at least
d
three runs analysed on at least two different days should be evaluated. The between-run CV value
should not exceed 15% for the QC samples, except for the LLOQ which should not exceed 20%.
e
4.1.7. Dilution integrity
Dilution of samples should not affect the accuracy and precision. If applicable, dilution integrity should
be demonstrated by spiking the matrix withs an analyte concentration above the ULOQ and diluting this
sample with blank matrix (at least five determinations per dilution factor). Accuracy and precision
should be within the set criteria, i.e. within ±15%. Dilution integrity should cover the dilution applied
to the study samples. r
Evaluation of dilution integrity may be covered by partial validation. Use of another matrix may be
e
acceptable, as long as it has been demonstrated that this does not affect precision and accuracy.
4.1.8. Matrix effect
p
Matrix effects should be investigated when using mass spectrometric methods, using at least 6 lots of
blank matrix from individual donors. Pooled matrix should not be used.
u
For each analyte and the IS, the matrix factor (MF) should be calculated for each lot of matrix, by
calculating the ratio of the peak area in the presence of matrix (measured by analysing blank matrix
spiked after extraction with analyte), to the peak area in absence of matrix (pure solution of the
anSalyte). The IS normalised MF should also be calculated by dividing the MF of the analyte by the MF
of the IS. The CV of the IS-normalised MF calculated from the 6 lots of matrix should not be greater
than 15 %. This determination should be done at a low and at a high level of concentration (maximum
of 3 times the LLOQ and close to the ULOQ).
If this approach cannot be used, for instance in the case of on-line sample preparation, the variability
of the response from lot to lot should be assessed by analysing at least 6 lots of matrix, spiked at a
low and at a high level of concentration (maximum of 3 times the LLOQ and close to the ULOQ). The
validation report should include the peak areas of the analyte and of the IS and the calculated
concentration for each individual sample. The overall CV calculated for the concentration should not be
greater than 15 %.
If the matrix is difficult to obtain, less than 6 different lots of matrix may be used, but this should be
justified. However, matrix effects should still be investigated.
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 8/23

If a formulation for injection to be administered to the subjects or animals contains excipients known
to be responsible for matrix effects, for instance polyethylene glycol or polysorbate, matrix effects
should be studied with matrix containing these excipients, in addition to blank matrix. The matrix used
for this evaluation should be obtained from subjects or animals administered the excipient, unless it
has been demonstrated that the excipient is not metabolised or transformed in-vivo. The effect of the
excipients can be studied by the determination of the MF or by a dilution study of a study sample with
a high concentration with blank matrix not containing the excipient. d
In addition to the normal matrix it is recommended to investigate matrix effects on other samples e.g.
haemolysed and hyperlipidaemic plasma samples. If samples from special populations (such as renally
or hepatically impaired populations) are to be analysed it is also recoemmended to study matrix effects
using matrix from such populations.
4.1.9. Stability d
Evaluation of stability should be carried out to ensure that every step taken during sample preparation
and sample analysis, as well as the storage conditions used do not affect the concentration of the
e
analyte.
Stability should be ensured for every step in the analytical method, meaning that the conditions
applied to the stability tests, such as sample matrix, anticoagulant, container materials, storage and
s
analytical conditions should be similar to those used for the actual study samples. Reference to data
published in the literature is not considered sufficient.
Stability of the analyte in the studied mratrix is evaluated using low and high QC samples (blank matrix
spiked with analyte at a concentration of a maximum of 3 times the LLOQ and close to the ULOQ)
which are analysed immediateely after preparation and after the applied storage conditions that are to
be evaluated. The QC samples are analysed against a calibration curve, obtained from freshly spiked
calibration standards, and the obtained concentrations are compared to the nominal concentrations.
The mean concentration at each level should be within ±15% of the nominal concentration.
p
Stability of the stock and working solutions should be tested with an appropriate dilution, taking into
consideration the linearity and measuring range of the detector.
Stability stuudies should investigate the different storage conditions over time periods that equal or
exceed those applied to the actual study samples.
The following stability tests should be evaluated:
S
• stability of the stock solution and working solutions of the analyte and internal standard,
• freeze and thaw stability of the analyte in the matrix from freezer storage conditions to room
temperature or sample processing temperature,
• short term stability of the analyte in matrix at room temperature or sample processing
temperature,
• long term stability of the analyte in matrix stored in the freezer,
In addition the following tests should be performed if applicable:
• stability of the processed sample at room temperature or under the storage conditions to be
used during the study (dry extract or in the injection phase),
• on-instrument/ autosampler stability of the processed sample at injector or autosampler
temperature.
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 9/23

Regarding the freeze and thaw stability: The QC samples are stored and frozen in the freezer at the
intended temperature and thereafter thawed at room or processing temperature. After complete
thawing, samples are refrozen again applying the same conditions. At each cycle, samples should be
frozen for at least 12 hours before they are thawed. The number of cycles in the freeze-thaw stability
should equal or exceed that of the freeze/thaw cycles of study samples.
Regarding long term stability of the analyte in matrix stored in the freezer: The QC samples should be
d
stored in the freezer under the same storage conditions and at least for the same duration as the study
samples. For small molecules it is considered acceptable to apply a bracketing approach, i.e. in case
stability has been proved for instance at -70°C and -20°C, it is not necessary to investigate the
stability at temperatures in between. For large molecules (such as peeptides and proteins) stability
should be studied at each temperature at which study samples will be stored. Study samples may be
used in addition to QC samples, but the exclusive use of study samples is not considered sufficient as
the nominal concentrations of those samples is not known. The results of the evaluation of long term
d
stability should be available before the study report is issued.
Regarding the stability of stock and working solutions: It is not needed to study the stability at each
concentration level of working solutions and a bracketing approach can be used. It is not needed to
e
study the stability of stable-isotope labelled internal standards if it is demonstrated that no isotope
exchange reactions occur under the same conditions as the stability of the analyte was demonstrated.
In case of a multi-analyte study and specific for bioequivalence studies, attention should be paid to
s
stability of the analytes in the matrix containing all the analytes.
Sufficient attention should be paid to the stability of the analyte in the sampled matrix directly after
blood sampling of subjects and furtherr preparation before storage, to ensure that the obtained
concentrations by the analytical method reflect the concentrations of the analyte in the subject at the
moment of sampling. A demoenstration of this stability may be needed on a case-by-case basis,
depending on the structure of the analyte.
4.2. Partial valpidation
In situations where minor changes are made to an analytical method that has already been validated,
a full validation may not be necessary, depending on the nature of the applied changes. Changes for
u
which a partial validation may be needed include transfer of the bioanalytical method to another
laboratory, change in equipment, calibration concentration range, limited sample volume, another
matrix or species, change in anticoagulant, sample processing procedure, storage conditions etc. All
S
modifications should be reported and the scope of revalidation or partial validation justified.
Partial validation can range from as little as the determination of the within-run precision and accuracy,
to an almost full validation.
4.3. Cross validation
Where data are obtained from different methods within and across studies or when data are obtained
within a study from different laboratories, applying the same method, comparison of those data is
needed and a cross validation of the applied analytical methods should be carried out. Differences in
sample preparation or the use of another analytical method may result in different outcomes between
the study sites. Cross validation should be performed in advance of study samples being analysed if
possible. For the cross validation, the same set of QC samples or study samples should be analysed by
both analytical methods. For QC samples, the obtained mean accuracy by the different methods should
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 10/23

be within 15% and may be wider, if justified. For study samples, the difference between the two values
obtained should be within 20% of the mean for at least 67% of the repeats. The outcome of the cross
validation is critical in determining whether the obtained data are reliable and whether they can be
compared and used.
5. Analysis of study samples
d
After full validation of the analytical method, analysis of study or subject samples can be carried out.
Before start of the analysis of the study samples the performance of the bioanalytical method should
have been verified.
e
The study samples, QC samples and calibration standards should be processed in accordance with the
validated analytical method to ensure the acceptability of the analytical run.
d
5.1. Analytical run
An analytical run consists of the blank sample (processed matrix sample without analyte and without
e
IS) and a zero sample (processed matrix with IS), calibration standards at a minimum of 6
concentration levels, at least 3 levels of QC samples (low, medium and high) in duplicate (or at least 5
% of the number of study samples, whichever is higher), and study samples to be analysed. As
s
indicated before the calibration standards and QC samples should have been spiked independently
using separately prepared stock solutions, unless the nominal concentration(s) of the stock solutions
have been established. All samples (calibration standards, QC samples, and study samples) should be
r
processed and extracted as one single batch of samples in the order in which they intend to be
submitted or analysed. A single batch is comprised of samples which are handled at the same time, i.e.
e
subsequently processed without interruption in time and by the same analyst with the same reagents
under homogeneous conditions. Analysing samples, which were prepared separately as several
batches, in a single analytical run should be avoided. If such an approach cannot be avoided, for
instance due to bencph-top stability limitations, each batch of samples should include low, medium and
high QC samples. Acceptance criteria should be pre-established in a Standard Operating Procedure
(SOP) or in the study plan and should be defined for the whole analytical run and the separate batches
in the run.
u
For bioequivalence studies it is advised to analyse all samples of one subject together in one analytical
run to reduce the variability in outcome. The QC samples should be divided over the run in such a way
that the accuracy and precision of the whole run is ensured.
S
5.2. Acceptance criteria of an analytical run
Criteria for acceptance or rejection of an analytical run should be defined in the protocol, in the study
plan or in a SOP. In case a whole run consist of more batches, acceptance criteria should be applied to
the whole run and to the individual batches. The run can be acceptable, although a batch might have
to be rejected, as criteria were not met.
The following acceptance criteria should apply:
Accuracy:
The back calculated concentrations of the calibration standards should be within ±15% of the nominal
value, except for the LLOQ for which it should be within ±20%. At least 75% of the calibration
standards, with a minimum of six, must fulfil this criterion. If one of the calibration standards does not
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 11/23

meet these criteria, this calibration standard should be rejected and the calibration curve without this
calibration standard should be re-evaluated, and regression analysis performed.
If the rejected calibration standard is the LLOQ, the LLOQ for this analytical run is the next lowest
acceptable calibration standard of the calibration curve. If the highest calibration standard is rejected,
the ULOQ for this analytical run is the next acceptable lower calibration standard of the calibration
curve. The revised calibration range must cover all QC samples (low, medium and high).
d
The accuracy values of the QC samples should be within ±15% of the nominal values. At least 67% of
the QC samples and at least 50% at each concentration level should comply with this criterion. In case
these criteria are not fulfilled the analytical run should be rejected, and the study samples re-extracted
e
and analysed.
In the case of the simultaneous determination of several analytes, there should be one calibration
curve for each analyte studied. If an analytical run is acceptable for one analyte but has to be rejected
d
for another analyte, the data for the accepted analyte can be used, but the samples should be re-
extracted and analysed for determination of the rejected analyte.
If replicate calibration standards are used and only one of the LLOQ or ULOQ standards fails, the
e
calibration range is unchanged.
The overall (mean) accuracy and precision of the QC samples of all accepted runs should be calculated
at each concentration level and reported in the analytical report. In case the overall mean accuracy
s
and precision exceeds 15%, this should lead to additional investigations justifying this deviation. In the
case of bioequivalence trials it may result in the rejection of the data.
r
5.3. Calibration range
e
If a narrow range of analyte concentrations of the study samples is known or anticipated before the
start of study sample analysis, it is recommended to either narrow the calibration curve range, adapt
the concentrations of the QC samples, or add new QC samples at different concentration levels as
p
appropriate, to adequately reflect the concentrations of the study samples.
If a narrow range of analysis values is unanticipated, but observed after the start of sample analysis, it
is recommended that the analysis is stopped and either the standard calibration range narrowed,
u
existing QC concentrations revised, or QC samples at additional concentrations are added to the
original curve before continuing with study sample analysis. It is not necessary to reanalyse samples
analysed before optimising the standard curve range or QC concentrations.
S
The same applies if it appears that a large number of the analyte concentrations of the study samples
appear to be above the ULOQ. The calibration curve range should be extended, if possible, and QC
samples added or their concentrations modified.
At least 2 QC sample levels should fall within the range of concentrations measured in study samples.
If the calibration curve range is changed, the bioanalytical method should be revalidated (partial
validation) to verify the response function and to ensure accuracy and precision.
5.4. Reanalysis of study samples
Possible reasons for reanalysis of study samples and criteria to select the value to be reported should
be predefined in the protocol, study plan or SOP, before the actual start of the analysis of the samples.
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 12/23

The number of samples (and percentage of total number of samples) that have been reanalysed should
be discussed in the study report.
The following are examples of reasons for study sample reanalysis:
• rejection of an analytical run because the run did not fulfil the acceptance criteria with regard
to accuracy of the calibration standards and/or the QC samples,
• internal standard response significantly different from the response fodr the calibration standard
and QC samples, if such criteria have been pre-defined in a SOP,
• improper sample injection or malfunction of equipment,
e
• the obtained concentration is above the ULOQ or below the run’s LLOQ, in runs where the
lowest standard sample has been rejected from a calibration curve, resulting in a higher LLOQ
compared with other runs,
d
• identification of quantifiable analyte levels in pre-dose samples or placebo sample,
• poor chromatography.
e
For bioequivalence studies, normally reanalysis of study samples because of a pharmacokinetic reason
is not acceptable, as this may affect and bias the outcome of such a study. In this case, reanalysis
might be considered as part of laboratory investigations, to identify possible reasons for results
considered as abnormal and to prevent thes recurrence of similar problems in the future.
In case of reanalysis because of positive pre-dose samples or because of a pharmacokinetic reason,
the reanalysed samples should be identified and the initial value, the reason for reanalysis, the values
r
obtained in the reanalyses, the finally accepted value and a justification for the acceptance should be
provided.
e
Re-injection of samples can be made in case of instrument failure if reinjection reproducibility and on-
injector stability have been demonstrated during validation. Re-injection of a full analytical run or of
individual calibration standard samples or QC samples, simply because the calibration or QCs failed,
p
without any identified analytical cause, is not acceptable.
The safety of trial subjects should take precedence over any other aspect of the trial. Consequently,
there may be other circumstances when it is necessary to re-extract and/or re-analyse specific study
u
samples, for example where an unexpected or anomalous result is identified that may impact on
patient safety.
S
5.5. Integration
Chromatogram integration and re-integration should be described in a SOP. Any deviation from this
SOP should be discussed in the analytical report. Chromatogram integration parameters and in case of
re-integration, initial and the final integration data should be documented at the laboratory and should
be available upon request. For further guidance reference is made to the “Reflection Paper for
Laboratories That Perform The Analysis Or Evaluation Of Clinical Trial Samples.”
(EMA/INS/GCP/532137/2010).
6. Incurred samples reanalysis
The use of calibration standards and QC samples during validation may not mimic the actual study
samples. Differences for instance in protein binding, back-conversion of known and unknown
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 13/23

metabolites, sample inhomogeneity or concomitant medications, may affect the accuracy and precision
of the analyte in such samples during processing and storage. It is therefore recommended to evaluate
accuracy of incurred samples by reanalysis of study samples in separate runs at different days. The
extent of testing depends on the analyte and the study samples, and should be based upon in-depth
understanding of the analytical method and analyte. However, as a guide, 10% of the samples should
be reanalysed in case the number of samples is less than 1000 samples and 5% of the number of
samples exceeding 1000 samples. Furthermore, it is advised to obtain sampldes around C
max
and in the
elimination phase.
The percent difference between the initial concentration and the concentration measured during the
repeat analysis should not be greater than 20% of their mean for ate least 67 % of the repeats. The
following equation should be used for the calculations:
(repeat value – initial value)
%difference = ---------------------------------- x100
d
mean value
Large differences between results may indicate analytical issues and should be investigated.
e
In case incurred sample analysis showed deviating results, this should be investigated, and adequate
steps should be taken to minimize inaccuracy (and imprecision).
Incurred sample reanalysis should be dones at least in the following situations:
• toxicokinetic studies once per species
• all pivotal bioequivalence trialsr
• first clinical trial in subjects
e
• first patient trial
• first trial in patients with impaired hepatic and/or renal function
p
For animal studies, the incurred sample reanalysis may be done only in early Phase studies, if these
are representative for pivotal studies in terms of dose administered and concentrations obtained.
Samples should not be pooled, as pooling may limit anomalous findings.
u
7. Ligand binding assays
S
7.1 Method validation
Ligand-binding assays (LBA) or immunoassays are especially used for macromolecules. The validation
principles and the considerations with regard to analysis of study samples, as indicated before should
also be applied in general for ligand-binding assays. However ligand binding assays pose several
challenges. Due to the inherent characteristics and complex structure of the macromolecules, the
extraction process is problematic and as such these assays are often run without prior separation of
the analyte of interest. In addition these assays do not directly measure the macromolecule itself but
indirectly measure a binding reaction with reagents employed in the assay. For these reasons, several
issues need special attention.
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 14/23

7.1.1. Full validation
7.1.1.1. Reference standards
Macromolecules are heterogeneous and their potency and immunoreactivity may vary. The reference
material should be well characterised and documented (e.g. certificate of analysis and origin).The
purest reference standard available at the time should be procured. It is strodngly recommended that
the batch of the reference standard used for the preparation of calibration standards and QC samples
is the same as used for dosing in the non clinical and clinical studies. In case of change of batch, an
analytical characterisation and bioanalytical evaluation should be careried out prior to use to ensure that
the performance characteristics of the method are not altered.
7.1.1.2. Specificity
d
Specificity of the binding reagent(s) refer(s) to its (their) ability to bind solely to the analyte of
interest. Specificity is related to the concept of cross-reactivity. Ideally the binding reagent should be
specific such that no cross-reactivity occurs with steructurally “related compounds” (e.g. endogenous
compounds, isoforms, variants forms of the analyte, or physico-chemically similar compounds) or with
anticipated concomitant medication. During method development and validation, frequently these
“related molecules” are not available. Evaluation of specificity may be conducted after the original
s
validation is completed as more data on the behaviour of the analyte become available. Specificity
should be tested with QC samples by adding increasing concentrations of available “related molecules”
or drugs expected to be concomitantly administered, into drug-naive sample matrix (matrix obtained
r
from animals or subjects never exposed to the analyte) and measuring the accuracy of the
macromolecule of interest at both LLOQ and ULOQ. The assay acceptance criteria of the QC samples
e
should be within 25% of the nominal values.
7.1.1.3. Selectivity
p
Selectivity of a ligand-binding assay is the ability to measure the analyte of interest in the presence of
unrelated compounds in the matrix. Generally there is no extraction due to the inherent characteristics
of macromoulecules. Then, unrelated compounds present in matrix e.g. degrading enzymes, heterophilic
antibodies or rheumatoid factor, may interfere with the analyte of interest in the ligand binding assay.
Selectivity is tested by spiking at least 10 sources of sample matrix at or near the LLOQ. These sources
should include lipemic and haemolysed samples. It is also strongly recommended that sources from
S
relevant disease population be included. Selectivity should be evaluated at the low end of an assay
where problems occur in most cases. It may be prudent also to evaluate selectivity at higher analyte
concentrations. In cases where interference is concentration dependent, it is essential to determine the
minimum concentration where interference occurs. It may be necessary to adjust the lower level of
quantification accordingly, before assay validation. The accuracy should be within 20% (25% at the
LLOQ) of the nominal spiked concentration in at least 80% of the matrices evaluated.
7.1.1.4. Carry-over effect
If robotic liquid handling systems are used, potential for carry-over should be investigated by placing
blank samples after samples with a high analyte concentration or calibration standard at the upper
limit of quantification.
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 15/23

7.1.1.5. Matrix selection
The measurement of some macromolecules may not be possible in complex matrices without
extraction due to high interferences with high levels of structurally related endogenous compounds.
Although the use of extracted matrix (e.g. charcoal, immuno-affinity) or alternative matrix (e.g.
protein buffers, dialysed serum) is not recommended, the use of such matrices may be necessary
when there is no other strategy to quantify the analyte of interest. The calibration standard curve may
d
be prepared in these surrogate matrices. QC samples should be prepared in the actual sample matrix
and the accuracy should be calculated to demonstrate the absence of matrix effect.
e
7.1.1.6. Minimum required dilution
Because matrices may exhibit a high background signal, it may be necessary to determine the
minimum required dilution. The minimum required dilution is the smallest dilution to which a sample
d
must be diluted in buffer to optimize accuracy and precision in an assay run by reducing the signal to
noise ratio. Spiked samples should be prepared in the same matrix as the study samples for
determination of the minimum required dilution.
e
7.1.1.7. Calibration curve
The response function of the calibration cursve is measured indirectly and is generally non linear and
often sigmoidal. A minimum of 6 calibration standards should be run at least in duplicate. The
calibration standards should be spaced approximately evenly on a logarithmic scale within the
anticipated range. In addition to the cralibration standards, anchor points outside the range of
quantification can be used to facilitate the fitting of the curve. A minimum of 6 independent runs
should be evaluated during thee validation. The results must be reported in a table to establish the
overall robustness of the regression model of the calibration curve. A calibration standard may be
excluded from the curve due to a technical error with an assignable cause (e.g. pipetting error).
The target back-calcuplated concentrations of the calibration standards should be within 20% of the
nominal value (25% at LLOQ and ULOQ) for at least 75% of calibration standards. The anchor
calibrators do not require acceptance criteria since they are beyond the quantifiable range of the curve.
u
7.1.1.8. Precision and accuracy
For the estimation of precision and accuracy QC samples should not be freshly prepared, but should be
S
frozen and treated the same way as for the analysis of study samples. At least 5 QC samples
(anticipated LLOQ, less than 3 times the LLOQ, mid, high and anticipated ULOQ) should be used to
assess accuracy, precision and the total error of the method. Validation should mimic the actual study
samples analysis, i.e. in case a study sample is measured twice (i.e. using 2 wells) as recommended
then during validation QCs should be analysed twice (i.e. using 2 wells per QC sample). Measurements
should be made across at least 6 independent assay runs over several days. Regarding within-run and
between-run accuracy, the mean concentration should be within 20% of the nominal value at each
concentration level (25% at the LLOQ and ULOQ). The within-run and between-run precision should
not exceed 20% (25 % at LLOQ and ULOQ). Furthermore the total error (i.e. sum of absolute value of
the % relative error and % coefficient of variation) should not exceed 30% (40% at LLOQ and ULOQ).
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 16/23

7.1.1.9. Dilutional linearity
Because the narrow range of the calibration standard curve, it is necessary to demonstrate with QC
samples that the analyte of interest, when present in concentrations exceeding the range of
quantification (above ULOQ), can be accurately measured by the assay after dilution in blank matrix to
bring the analyte concentrations into the validated range for analysis. An additional reason for
conducting dilutional experiments is to detect a possible prozone or “hook effect” i.e. a signal
d
suppression caused by high concentrations of analyte. The back-calculated concentration for each
dilution should be within 20% of the nominal concentration after correction for dilution and the
precision of the final concentrations across all the dilutions should not exceed 20%.
e
7.1.1.10. Parallelism
If study samples are available, parallelism between the calibration standard curve and serially diluted
d
study samples should be assessed to detect possible matrix effect or differing affinities for metabolites.
A high concentration study sample (preferably close to C ) should be diluted to at least three
max
concentrations with blank matrix. The precision between samples in a dilution series should not exceed
e
30%. In case the sample does not dilute linearly (i.e. in a non parallel manner), a procedure for
reporting a result should be defined a priori. If study samples are not available during the validation of
the method, parallelism should be evaluated as soon as study samples become available.
s
7.1.1.11. Stability of the samples
Stability of the analyte is evaluated usring samples of the low and high level QC samples as described
before (section 4.1.9). As previously mentioned, the investigation of stability should cover short-term
stability at room temperaturee or sample processing temperature and freeze-thaw stability. In addition,
long-term freezer stability should be studied at each temperature at which study samples will be
stored.
The mean concentratpion at each level should be within 20% of the nominal concentration.
7.1.1.12. Reagents
u
Critical reagents, including binding reagents (e.g. binding proteins, aptamers, antibodies or conjugated
antibodies) and those containing enzymatic moieties have direct impact on the results of the assay and
therefore their quality must be assured. Accordingly, when changing reagent batches during validation
S
or sample analysis the analytical performance of the method must be verified to ensure that it is not
altered compared with the original or previous batch.
Conditions guaranteeing the maintenance of the stability of both non critical reagents (e.g. buffers,
diluents or acidification reagents) and more importantly of the critical reagents should be documented
in order to ensure that the performance of the method is not affected over time.
7.1.1.13. Commercial kits
Commercial kits may have been developed for purposes other than to support pharmacokinetics.
Therefore, commercial kits need to be revalidated to ensure that the LLOQ and the QC samples in the
actual concentration range to be used for sample analysis perform accurately and precisely. The
principles of validation listed above apply.
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 17/23

7.2. Partial validation and cross-validation
All the validation aspects reported in previous sections 4.2 and 4.3 are applicable to ligand binding
assays.
7.3. Analysis of study samples
d
7.3.1. Analytical run
Most often microtiter plates are used for LBA. An analytical run may ecomprise several individual plates,
but each plate should contain an individual set of calibration standards and QC samples to compensate
for difference in plate performance. The sample capacity in some platforms may be limited. Then, it
may be acceptable that a set of calibration standards be pladced in the first and the last platform and
QC samples on every single platform.
It is recommended to assay a study sample in replicate, i.e by using at least 2 wells instead of 1.
e
7.3.2. Acceptance criteria for study sample analysis
The back calculated concentrations of the calibration standards should be within 20% of nominal value,
s
except for LLOQ and the ULOQ for which it should be within 25%. At least 75 % of the calibration
standards with a minimum of 6, must fulfil this criterion. This requirement does not apply to anchor
calibrators.
r
Each plate should contain at least 3 levels of QC samples (low, medium and high) at least in duplicate.
Also during within study valideation, the QCs should mimic the analysis of the study sample with regard
to the number of wells used per study sample. At least 67% QC samples and 50% at each
concentration level should be within 20% of the nominal value. Exceptions to this criterion should be
justified. p
7.3.3. Incurred samples reanalysis
u
All the considerations regarding the incurred sample analysis reported in previous section 6 are
applicable to ligand binding assays. The concentration obtained for the initial analysis and the
concentration obtained by reanalysis should be within 30% of their mean for at least 67% of the
S
repeats.
8. Reports
Information regarding conducted audits/inspection should be included in the report(s).
8.1. Validation report
Depending on the level of detail of the information provided in the validation report, reference to the
SOPs for relevant analysis specific procedures may be sufficient. Otherwise these SOPs should be
appended to the report.
All source data should be available in its original format and available on request.
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 18/23

Any deviation from the validation protocol should be recorded.
The validation report should include at least the following information:
• summary of the validation performances,
• details of the applied analytical method and where appropriate, the source of the analytical
method (references from literature and/or modifications in the procedure),
d
• details of the assay procedure (analyte, IS, sample pre-treatment, extraction and analysis),
• reference standards (origin, batch number, certificate of analysis, stability and storage
conditions),
e
• calibration standards and QC samples (matrix , anticoagulant if applicable, preparation,
preparation dates, and storage conditions),
• run acceptance criteria, d
• analysis:
• table of all analytical runs with analysis dates, whether passed or failed and the
e
reason for the failure
• table of calibration results of all accepted analytical runs, including calibration range,
response function, back-calculated concentrations, and accuracy,
s
• table of QC results of all accepted analytical runs (within- and between-run precision
and accuracy); values outside acceptance criteria should be clearly marked,
r
• stability data of stock solution, working solution, QC, covering the applied storage
conditions,
e
• data on selectivity, LLOQ, carry-over, matrix effect if applicable, dilution integrity;
• unexpected results obtained during validation with full justification of the action taken,
p
• deviations from method and/or SOPs (description of deviations, impact on study, supportive
data).
All measurements with the individual calculated concentrations have to be presented in the validation
u
report.
8.2. Analytical report
S
The analytical report should include a reference to the validation report(s) applicable to the analysis of
the study samples. Furthermore it should include a detailed description of the analysis of the study
samples.
If the analytical report provides detailed information, a reference to the analysis specific SOPs in the
analytical report is sufficient. Otherwise the SOPs should be appended to the analytical report.
All source data should be available in its original format and available on request.
Any deviation from the protocol, analytical procedure or SOPs should also be discussed in the analytical
report.
The analytical report should include at least the following information:
• reference standards (origin, batch, certificate of analysis, stability, storage conditions)
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 19/23

• calibration standards and QC samples (storage conditions)
• run acceptance criteria (short description, reference to specific protocol or SOP)
• assay procedure (short description)
• sample tracking (dates of receipt and contents, sample conditions on receipt, storage location
and conditions, if applicable)
d
• study sample analysis:
- content of the analytical run,
• table identifying all analytical runs and study sameples, with run dates and results,
• table of calibration results of all (passed) analytical runs,
• table of QC results of all (passed) analytical runs; values outside acceptance criteria
d
should be clearly marked;
• failed analytical runs (identity, assay date, reason for failure),
• deviations from method and/or SOPs (desceription of deviations, impact on study, supportive
data),
• reassay, excluding reassay due to analytical reasons, such as failed run (table of sample
identification, reason for re-assay, osriginal and re-assay values).
The results of incurred sample reanalysis may be supplied either in the validation report, in the
analytical report or in a stand alone report.
r
For bioequivalence studies, all chromatograms from the runs which include 20% of the subjects,
including the corresponding QeC samples and calibration standards should be appended to the analytical
study report. For other studies representative chromatograms should be appended to the report.
Additional chromatograms should be available on request.
p
u
S
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 20/23

Definitions
1. Accuracy
The accuracy of an analytical procedure expresses the closeness of the determined value to the value
which is accepted either as a conventional true value or an accepted reference value. Accuracy is
defined as (determined value/true value) x100%.
2. Analyte d
A specific chemical moiety being measured, which can be intact drug, biomolecule or its derivative,
metabolite and/or degradation product in a biologic matrix.
e
3. Analytical run
A complete set of analytical and study samples with appropriate number of calibration standards and
QC samples for their validation. Several runs may be completed in one day, or one run may take
d
several days to complete.
4. Analytical Procedure
e
The analytical procedure refers to the way of performing the analysis. It should describe in detail the
steps necessary to perform each analysis.
5. Anchor calibrators
s
Anchor calibrators are standards points outside of the range of quantification, used to assist in fitting
the non linear regression of the standard curve in ligand-binding assays.
6. Calibration range r
The range of an analytical procedure is the interval between the upper and lower concentration
e
(amounts) of analyte in the sample (including these concentrations) for which it has been
demonstrated that the analytical procedure meets the requirements for precision, accuracy and
response function.
p
7. Calibration standard
A matrix to which a known amount of analyte has been added or spiked. Calibration standards are
used to construct calibration curves.
u
8. Carry over
Carry-over is the appearance of an analyte signal in blank sample after the analysis of samples with a
S
high analyte concentration.
9. Cross validation
Comparison of validation parameters of two bioanalytical methods.
10. Full validation
Establishment of all validation parameters to apply to sample analysis for the bioanalytical method for
each analyte.
11. Incurred samples
Study samples from dosed subjects or animals.
12. Incurred sample reanalysis
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 21/23

The analysis of a portion of the incurred samples to determine whether the original analytical results
are reproducible.
13. Internal standard
Test compound(s) (e.g. a structurally similar analogue, or stable isotope labelled compound) added to
calibration standards, QC samples and study samples at a known and constant concentration to correct
for experimental variability during sample preparation and analysis.
d
14. Lower limit of quantification (LLOQ)
The lower limit of quantification of an individual analytical procedure is the lowest amount of analyte in
e
a sample which can be quantitatively determined with pre-defined precision and accuracy.
15. Matrix effect
The direct or indirect alteration or interference in response due to the presence of unintended analytes
d
(for analysis) or other interfering substances in the sample.
16. Nominal concentration
e
Theoretical or expected concentration.
17. Partial validation
Series of analytical experiments where only relevant parts of the validation are repeated after
s
modifications are made to the validated bioanalytical method.
18. Precision
r
The precision of an analytical procedure expresses the closeness of agreement (degree of scatter)
between a series of measurements obtained under the prescribed conditions. Precision is defined as
e
the ratio of standard deviation/mean (%).
19. Quality control (QC) sample
A spiked sample usedp to monitor the performance of a bioanalytical method and to assess the integrity
and validity of the results of the unknown samples analysed in an individual batch.
20. Response function
u
Response function is a function which adequately describes relationship between instrument response
(e.g. peak area or height ratio) and the concentration (amount) of analyte in the sample. Response
function is defined within a given range.
S
21. Selectivity
Selectivity is the ability of the bioanalytical method to measure and differentiate the analyte(s) of
interest and internal standard in the presence of components which may be expected to be present in
the sample.
22. Specificity
Specificity is the ability to measure the analyte unequivocally in the presence of other compounds,
either exogenous or endogenous, in the matrix.
23. Stability
The chemical stability of an analyte in a given matrix under specific conditions for given time intervals.
24. Standard Operating Procedure
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 22/23

Document which describes the regularly recurring operations relevant to the quality of the
investigation and enabling to carry out the operations correctly and always in the same manner..
25. Upper limit of quantification (ULOQ)
The upper limit of quantification of an individual analytical procedure is the highest amount of analyte
in a sample which can be quantitatively determined with pre-defined precision and accuracy.
d
e
d
e
s
r
e
p
u
S
Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
EMEA/CHMP/EWP/192217/2009 Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 23/23